Hello and welcome to the solution for the fourth on site interview question for the large search engine
company mock interview.
So just to reiterate what the question was we needed to find the square root of a given number rounded
down to the nearest integer without using any built in square root functions in Python.
That's a security from the math library.
So for example if you're given any number between 9 and 15 your function should return 3 and the number
between 16:24 your function should return for All right.
So how to actually go about solving this.
Well we know a little fact and that fact is this line right here.
The square root of a non-negative number n always lies between 0 and end divided by two.
And so that becomes a fact that we can use so that the straightforward way to solve this problem is
just check every number let's say k that comes between 0 and end divided by 2 until the square of K
becomes greater than or equal to N if case squared it becomes equal to.
And then we just return k.
Otherwise we return came minus one because we're rounding down.
So let's go ahead and implement that in a function and explain the logic that's going on.
So going to make a function called solution
and I'm going to say if numb is less than zero then we have issues with trying to take the square of
a negative number.
We're not worried about imaginary numbers in this case.
I'm just going to say value error.
So return some sort of exception there.
After that I'm going to check if my number is 1.
In that case I know just to return one square root of 1 is 1 and this is where we start our algorithm
.
So I get to say for k in range and I'm going to go from zero to none.
Divided by two.
Since indexing starts at zero I'm going to say numb divided by two plus one to do this in python.
And then you say if K squared is equal to Nome return k.
And then I can say LCF case where is greater than num then return K minus 1 and then return k.
OK so that was actually pretty straightforward.
We're just going through and checking every number k between 0 and divided by two squaring that k value
until it becomes greater than or equal to that.
And we're checking.
And then if K squared becomes equal to and then we just return k.
Otherwise her rounding down.
We're going to return K minus 1.
All right.
So we can go ahead and check that out.
Solution put in a number let's say 14 and we get three.
And that makes sense if we keep going to 15 we should still get three.
And then finally at 16 we should break that barrier and go to 4 6 4 times for the 16.
The complexity of this approach is o n so because we have to check and divide it by two numbers in the
worst case.
So this linear algorithm is actually pretty inefficient and we can use some sort of binary search to
speed it up.
So remember we this binary search and other interview problems so it's going to come up here as well
since we know that the result is between 0 and end divided by two.
We can first try and divide it by four to see whether its square is less than greater than or equal
to.
And if it's equal then we simply return that value.
If it's less than we continue our search between and divided by 4 and then divide it by 2.
Otherwise if it's greater than we search between zero in N divided by 4.
So we get this binary search pattern but keep cutting things and have in both cases reduce potential
range by half.
And continuum this is the logic of that search.
So this was unfamiliar from the eggdrop problem here where we're not performing regular binary search
that's going to be a little modified.
We want to ensure that we actually stop at a number k where K Square is less or equal to N the K plus
one square is greater than 10.
So let's go ahead and implement this more efficient solution.
So we'll call this better solution.
Hasson.
And let's go in and zoom in here so we can see here your function.
Again I'm going to start by just checking if it's less than zero and or raise and air you can raise
any exception here just raising a value there and then again if my number is equal to 1 I'm just going
to return 1.
OK so let's implement this better solution.
Kind of a modified binary search here.
I'm going to say I have a variable called Low 0 and I'll set my high equal to that top of the range
we discussed earlier which was divided by two plus one MSA while low plus one is less than high.
Here's what we're going to do.
We're going to take since we're doing a binary search the middle now we're going to say the middle is
equal to low plus high minus low
divided by two.
Then I'm going to say Square is equal to that middle number squared.
And here's where we start doing our checks.
You can check if that square is equal to my number that I'm going to return mid else if my square is
less than them I'm going to say low.
Let's go and scroll down here is equal to that.
And then finally.
Else I can say high is equal to mid.
Then once that's all done I'm just going to return my low number.
So let's go in and test that the better solution sets in on 13.
You notice we're going to get the same results.
Let's try 10:14 boops those 114.
Let's try 114.
And finally let's go up to 16 and we get four.
All right.
Excellent.
So one difference here from a regular binary search is the condition of that while loop it's low plus
one is less than high instead of low.
It's less than high.
So look at this here.
We have low plus one is sort of just low.
We also have low equals mid instead of low equals mid plus one over here and we have high walls mid
instead of height was mid minus 1.
And these are modifications we make to the standard binary search.
The complexity of it though is still the same.
That's logarithmic.
Oh order big-O log in which is actually much better than our naive linear solution just checking them
all.
And there's also a constant time solution which involves a clever math trick I'm going to show you it
.
We hop over to the Jupiter notebook for the solution.
You can take advantage of this trick right here where the square root of N is equal to end to the power
of 1 1/2 0.5 which using log base 2 you can convert into this to the power of one 1/2.
I was like base 2 then and this solution exploits the property that we take the exponent of the log
of a number.
The result doesn't change.
Still the number itself.
So we can first calculate the log of the number multiply with 0.5 take the exponent and finally take
the floor of that value so round that down.
And this way we can to use voidness square root function by using a log function instead.
Now whether or not you'll be allowed to use an interview setting is tricky and they may not actually
expect you to know this math trick.
But it's important to know it in case they ask.
So then the logarithm of a number rounded down to the nearest integer can be calculated in constant
time by looking at the position of the leftmost one in the binary representation of that number.
So it's actually a lot quicker and it's a constant time solution.
All right.
So thing is the solution doesn't always give the same result as above algorithms though because of the
rounding effects and depending on the interviewer's perspective you may either have this approach be
regarded as elegant and clever using this or as tricky just because you're cheating with the log function
.
So you should let your interviewer know that you're capable of the shortcut you're aware of it but they're
probably looking for this implementation here of the better solution that we went over.
All right.
So what should you go over here.
Should definitely go over binary search.
It's important for this question and you've seen it before on the eggdrop problem.
So it's something a lot of interview questions kind of have embedded inside of them.
All right.
That being said make sure I understand this solution and practice both of them understand why one is
a little better than the other and we'll go ahead and continue and see at the next lecture.
All right thanks everyone.